# United States - Arkansas

This page contains regional-specific information that is in addition to
the information at [General United States
Information](notes/usa-general.md).

Arkansas negative laws towards trans people. Some of these laws may
place trans people at risk. Trans people should particularly consider
the bathroom law. While it requires "arousing or gratifying a sexual
desire," how that will be enforced is a gray area. In addition, a
pending [bill](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/SB486/2025) would apply
bathroom law regulations to any government-controlled space, but is not
yet signed by the Governor (updated Apr. 17, 2025)..

The 2021 law Arkansas passed that banned youth trans healthcare has been
[found unconstitutional](https://wp.api.aclu.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/win-in-arkansas.pdf).
However, Arkansas has passed a second law (SB199 2023) which requires
doctors to spread misinformation about youth trans healthcare and places
some restrictions on the care may still be in effect.
It is unknown how this might have an impact on child custody.

## Non-discrimination Law

 * Arkansas non-discrimination law does not include LGBT people
 * Arkansas has banned local subdivisions from establishing inclusive
   non-discrimination laws.
 * Public school (K12 and higher education) employees are not be able to
   be disciplined for deadnaming or misgendering intentionally.

## Public Accommodations

 * A law makes it a sex crime to use a bathroom other than the one
   associated with your sex assigned at birth if a minor is present and
   you are "arousing or gratifying a sexual desire". It is unknown how
   this law will be utilized.
 * [SB486](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/SB486/2025), if signed by the
   Governor, would ban trans people from bathrooms, changing areas,
   sleeping quarters, etc, in shelters and government-controlled
   facilities. (updated Apr. 17, 2025)
 * Public accommodation access is not protected for trans people in
   Arkansas.
 * Arkansas has wide-reaching religious freedom laws that allow denial of
   some services on the basis of gender identity.

## Drag / Performance / Cross-dressing Laws

 * Exposure of prosthetic genitals or breasts partial or
   completely, during "performance" intended to appeal to "the prurient
   interest" is illegal.  These do not need to be attached to a human
   to be illegal. This applies in public and in any space where minors
   may be.

## Air Travel

See the [USA TSA](notes/tsa.md) document.

## Jails / Prisons

 * Trans women would typically be housed with men
 * Trans men would typically be housed with women
 * Non-binary people would typically be housed according to sex
   assigned at birth
 * If [SB486](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/SB486/2025) is signed by the
   Governor, housing would only be according to sex assigned at birth.
   (updated Apr. 17, 2025)

## Legal Definition of Sex

Non-binary people are not recognized by the state, due to March 12, 2024
[rules issued by the
Governor](https://arktimes.com/arkansas-blog/2024/03/12/sanders-targets-trans-community-again-with-strict-new-gender-rules-for-state-issued-ids).
This will be extended to state IDs if [AR
HB1796](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/HB1796/2025) is passed (not yet
signed by governor as of Apr. 11, 2025).

Intersex people are not generally recognized by the state.

Some laws specify male, female, and similar words based on sex assigned
at birth and/or chromosomes.

## Medical Care

 * Trans medical care is legal for adults
 * A 2023 law restricts medical transition for people under 18 has passed
   and became law. This goes into effect during summer of 2023. This
   bill requires providers to spread misinformation and places
   some restrictions on the care. Note however, a previous ban was
   declared unconstitutional and likely this 2023 law will be too.
 * Medical providers can deny some care on the basis of their religious
   beliefs.
 * A [federal executive
   order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/01/protecting-children-from-chemical-and-surgical-mutilation/)
   and hospitals seeking to limit their liability even before
   implementation of this order may make accessing care difficult or
   impossible for those under 19-years-old. (updated 13 February 2025).
   However, the government is prevented from implementing this order
   (thus hospitals are not bound by it) because of a [temporary
   restraining
   order](https://assets.aclu.org/live/uploads/2025/02/093114651219.pdf)
   against the government (13 February 2025).

## Child Custody / Abuse

 * Trans medical care will be illegal (as of summer 2023) for youth in
   Arkansas, although under current law that is not stayed, penalties
   will apply to doctors providing the care and not to parents.
 * It is unknown if transition might be used by the state to justify
   custody removal.
 * There is no sanctuary law preventing cooperation with other
   jurisdictions
 
## Relationship Recognition

 * Same-sex marriage (and thus all trans marriage) is recognized

## Relevant Laws

 * [2025 HB1796 - Bathroom Ban for government
   spaces (not yet signed by Governor as of Apr. 17, 2025)](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/SB486/2025)
 * [2025 HB1796 - ID gender marker ban (not yet signed by Governor as of
   Apr. 11, 2025)](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/HB1796/2025)
 * [2023 HB1156 - School Bathrooms](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/HB1156/id/2756961)
 * [2023 HB1468 - Deadnaming Students in K12 and Higher Ed](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/HB1468/id/2781770)
 * [2023 HB1615 - Discrimination attributed to religion allowed](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/HB1615/id/2781807)
 * [2023 SB199 - Restrictions on medical transition for youth](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/SB199/id/2745027)
 * [2023 SB270 - Sex crime of using "wrong" bathroom for sexual gratification](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/SB270/id/2781418)
 * [2023 SB294 - Don't say "gay"](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/SB294/id/2736770)
 * [2021 HB1570 - Ban on medical transition for youth - Ruled unconstitutional
 * [2015 SB202 - Ban on local non-discrimination ordinances](https://www.arkleg.state.ar.us/Acts/Document?type=pdf&act=137&ddBienniumSession=2015%2F2015R)
   and unenforcable](https://legiscan.com/AR/text/HB1570/id/2362964)

## General Safety

The state has a law that prevents instruction on sexual orientation or
gender identity up to grade five in schools.

In April, 2024, the only transgender resource center's building [was
vandalized](https://www.thv11.com/article/news/local/arkansas-transgender-resource-center-closed-vandalism/91-95f21c38-87c1-45e9-b2a0-58151f40feb9).
This has happened several times in the past, as well.

Because of the rhetoric around trans people in the political and media
space, trans people should use caution, particularly in bathrooms,
locker rooms, showers, etc.  Random and targeted attacks may occur, and
trans people who report these attacks can expect to be misgendered by
officials and public institutions.

## Resources

 * [Brandt et al v. Rutledge et al - Challenge to 2021 youth trans healthecare ban](https://www.aclu.org/cases/brandt-et-al-v-rutledge-et-al)
