# United States - Arizona

This page contains regional-specific information that is in addition to
the information at [General United States
Information](notes/usa-general.md).

Arizona has several negative laws towards trans people. However,
these laws are, thus far, fairly restricted and do not apply to most
trans visitors.

Arizona does criminalize some surgical trans care for children, but
does not generally criminalize such care, thus it appears that parents
visiting with trans children will not risk custody.

Note that same-sex marriage may not be recognized within some indigenous
nations.

## Non-discrimination Law

 * Arizona non-discrimination law does not include LGBT people specifically
 * Some municipalities have local non-discrimination laws that apply to
   gender identity.
 * Arizona has wide-reaching religious freedom laws that allow denial of
   some services on the basis of gender identity.

## Public Accommodations

 * Trans people are not banned from using appropriate bathrooms and locker
   rooms.
 * General public accommodation access is not specifically protected by law
   for trans people in Arizona.

## Drag / Performance / Cross-dressing Laws

 * Arizona does not have a drag/cross-dressing law.

## Air Travel

See the [USA TSA](notes/tsa.md) document.

## Jails / Prisons

 * Trans women would typically be [housed with
   men](https://fronterasdesk.org/content/1858125/attorney-trans-women-misgendered-flagstaff-arrest-held-mens-jail)
 * Trans men would typically be housed with women
 * Nonbinary people would typically be housed according to sex
   assigned at birth

## Legal Definition of Sex

Some laws define sex based on chromosomes, genitals, etc, at birth.

Non-binary people are not recognized.

By statute, changing birth certificate gender marker requires surgery.
This was invalidated [by a
court](https://www.courtlistener.com/docket/18606032/279/roe-v-herrington/),
however (as of Aug. 20, 2024).  Another attempt at requring this is
being attempted to be passed, as
[HB2438](https://legiscan.com/AZ/text/HB2438/id/3060341) (updated Apr.
17, 2025).

Intersex people have some limited recognition.

## Medical Care

 * Trans medical care is legal for adults.
 * Trans medical care, other than surgery, is legal for children.
 * Gender-related surgery on trans children is not legal. An exception
   exists for surgery done on people born with an intersex condition
   and for gender-related revision surgery.
 * A [federal executive
   order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/01/protecting-children-from-chemical-and-surgical-mutilation/)
   and hospitals seeking to limit their liability even before
   implementation of this order may make accessing care difficult or
   impossible for those under 19-years-old. (updated 13 February 2025).
   However, the government is prevented from implementing this order
   (thus hospitals are not bound by it) because of a [temporary
   restraining
   order](https://assets.aclu.org/live/uploads/2025/02/093114651219.pdf)
   against the government (13 February 2025).

## Child Custody / Abuse

 * Transition care is not specifically defined as child abuse
 * There is no sanctuary law preventing cooperation with other
   jurisdictions
 
## Relationship Recognition

 * Same-sex marriage (and thus all trans marriage) is recognized
 * The White Mountain Apache Tribe, Chiricahua Apache tribe, Hopi, and
   Arizona Tewa people recognize same-sex marriage.
 * Within the Navajo Nation, the Diné Marriage Act prohibits recognition
   of same-sex marriage. It is unknown how the "sex" of trans people
   would be seen under this law, potentially placing all trans/cis
   marriages at risk (straight or queer) as well as most queer
   marriages.
 * Within the Gila River Indian Reservation, same-sex marriage is not
   recognized.  It is unknown how the "sex" of trans people
   would be seen under this law, potentially placing all trans/cis
   marriages at risk (straight or queer) as well as most queer
   marriages.
 * It is unknown whether same-sex marriage is recognized within the
   Tohono O'odham Indian Reservation.

## Relevant Laws

 * [2025 HB2438 Birth certificate change restrictions (not yet signed by
   Governor, updated Apr. 17,
   2025)](https://legiscan.com/AZ/text/HB2438/id/3060341)
 * [2025 HB2062 Bathroom Ban (VETOED by Gov., not in effect; Updated
   Apr. 17, 2025)](https://legiscan.com/AZ/text/HB2062/2025)
 * [2022 SB1138 Gender Surgery for Youth](https://legiscan.com/AZ/text/SB1138/id/2562394)
 * [Diné Marriage Act (Applicable in the Navajo Nation)](https://courts.navajo-nsn.gov/Resolutions/29-05%20Marriage%20Act.pdf)

## General Safety

The state has a law that requires opt-in for public school instruction
on sexual orientation or gender identity.

Because of the rhetoric around trans people in the political and media
space, trans people should use caution, particularly in bathrooms,
locker rooms, showers, etc.  Random and targeted attacks may occur, and
trans people who report these attacks can expect to be misgendered by
officials and public institutions.

In addition because of transgender rhetoric, trans people have been
[blamed for at least one crime committed by another
person](https://www.fox10phoenix.com/news/man-accused-of-tagging-phoenix-warehouse-blamed-transgender-women-for-graffiti),
and trans people should be aware of sentiment that may cause them to be
seen as more prone to criminal behavior than cis people.

LGBT-inclusive faculty at Arizona State University, near Phoenix, have
been targeted by anti-LGBT hate groups both online and offline,
including a [physical attack on
campus](https://www.thepinknews.com/2023/10/18/video-shows-us-professor-assaulted-by-turning-point-members-over-drag-queen-story-hour-links/)
in October, 2023.

## Resources

