# United States - Hawaii

This page contains regional-specific information that is in addition to
the information at [General United States
Information](notes/usa-general.md).

Hawaii recognizes the gender of trans people. I.E. trans women are
considered women, trans men are men, and non-binary people, at least in
some instances are recognized as non-binary.  Some recognition may
require identification documentation changes, and some organizations or
agencies may not fully recognize these changes.

Hawaii does not appear to place child custody at risk.

Note that colonization disrupted Hawaiian culture significantly,
significantly impacting M훮h큰, or "people in the middle," who today
sometimes (but not always) also refer to themselves as trans.  Many
indigenous Hawaiians view tourism today as continuing the colonization
of Hawaii and ask tourists without connections to indigenous Hawaii
to plan vacations to places other than Hawaii, because of the harm that
will be done by this continuing form of colonization.

## Non-discrimination Law

 * Trans people are specifically named in Hawaii non-discrimination laws.

## Public Accommodations

 * Trans people are allowed to use the facilities they are comfortable
   in, including bathrooms, showers, locker rooms, etc.  Legal
   documentation of your gender is not required for this protection.

## Drag / Performance / Cross-dressing Laws

 * Drag performance and cross-dressing is legal in Hawaii.

## Air Travel

See the [USA TSA](notes/tsa.md) document.

## Jails / Prisons

 * Trans women are usually housed with men
 * Trans men are usually housed with women
 * Nonbinary people would typically be housed according to sex
   assigned at birth
 * News reports indicate that gender affirming care is sub-par or
   unavailable in custody.

## Legal Definition of Sex

 * There is no legal definition of male/female in Hawaii.

Non-binary people are recognized, at least by some aspects of
government, such as in the ability to change driver's licenses but not
birth certificates.

## Medical Care

 * Trans medical care is legal for all ages.

## Child Custody / Abuse

 * Transition care is not defined as child abuse
 * Hawaii does not have a "sanctuary law" protecting people receiving
   care in Hawaii.

## Relationship Recognition

 * Same-sex marriage (and thus all trans marriage) is recognized

## Relevant Laws

## General Safety

Because of the rhetoric around trans people in the political and media
space, trans people should use caution, particularly in bathrooms,
locker rooms, showers, etc.  Random and targeted attacks may occur, and
trans people who report these attacks can expect to sometimes be misgendered
by officials and public institutions.

However, much of Hawaii is considered reasonably safe. Indigenous
Hawaiians culture recognized people who were M훮h큰 or "in the middle."
As a result, there is some familiarity with non-cis gender expression.
However, due to the impact of Christianity and colonialism, prejudice
exists both within and outside of indigenous culture in Hawaii.

## Resources

 * [Hawaii Civil Rights Commission Gender Identity Flyer (2013)](https://labor.hawaii.gov/hcrc/files/2013/01/Gender-Identity-and-Expression-Flyer-Final-7.5.2017-2022-1.pdf)
