# United States - Kansas

This page contains regional-specific information that is in addition to
the information at [General United States
Information](notes/usa-general.md).

Kansas places trans people at risk by not recognizing any gender other
than sex assigned at birth, regardless of legal documentation changes in
Kansas or elsewhere.

Trans travelers should use extreme caution in Kansas due to 2023 SB180 (The
badly named "Women's Bill of Rights"). Kansas requires all state
agencies to treat all trans women as men, all trans men as women, and
all non-binary people on the basis of their sex assigned at birth. This
has wide-ranging implications, such as improper incarceration, bathroom
access, identifications, etc.

Kansas does not appear to place child custody at risk.

## Non-discrimination Law

 * Kansas non-discrimination law does not include LGBT people
 * The State is required under 2023 SB180 to discriminate against trans
   people.

## Public Accommodations

 * Because of Kansas's law defining sex legally (note that the law does
   not mention bathrooms directly), it may be interpreted by courts, in
   combination with other laws, to ban trans people from appropriate
   bathrooms. This is the opinion held by the Attorney General, so it is
   likely to be followed by state agencies.
 * Trans women are required to use male facilities such
   as bathrooms, showers, locker rooms, homeless accommodations, etc.
 * Trans men are required to use women's facilities such
   as bathrooms, showers, locker rooms, homeless accommodations, etc.
 * Non-binary people are required to use facilities
   based on sex assigned at birth.
 * Some cities have protections against gender-identity discrimination,
   but the state law will override many of these protections.
 * At least one religious-based shelter enforces a rule which bans any
   trans person [which makes residents
   "uncomfortable"](https://www.cjonline.com/story/news/local/2023/09/14/topeka-homeless-shelter-explains-policy-for-transgender-and-nonbinary-residents/70826076007/).
   This has been enforced against non-binary AFAB people in a women's
   shelter who were criticized for wearing boxers and being seen "with a
   bulge" (the person involved did not wear a packer at the shelter).

It is unknown how this would be enforced, beyond where the state has the
power to impose gender determination on people. It is likely that, for
instance, a trans woman using a women's bathroom could be charged with
other crimes that do carry a penalty on the basis that the state
prohibits her from being in the space.

## Drag / Performance / Cross-dressing Laws

 * Currently, no ban on drag performance

## Air Travel

See the [USA TSA](notes/tsa.md) document.

 * It is illegal to use a bathroom that does not match your sex
   assigned at birth in Kansas airports (note that Kansas City
   Airport - MCI - is in Missouri, not Kansas, and thus this law does
   not apply to the Kansas City Airport)

## Jails / Prisons

 * Trans women are required to be housed with men.
 * Trans men are required to be housed with women.
 * Nonbinary people are required to be housed according to sex
   assigned at birth.
 * The prison system is accused of particularly [egregious discrimination](https://www.kansascity.com/news/state/kansas/article284628270.html)
   against a trans prison worker. This indicates that the state may
   be extremely harsh towards trans inmates.

## Legal Definition of Sex

 * It is not possible to change the sex on your birth certificate or
   driver's license in Kansas.
 * sex = "biological sex, either male or female, at birth"
 * female = "individual whose biological reproductive system is developed
   to produce ova"
 * male = "individual whose biological reproductive system is developed
   to fertilize the ova of a female"
 * woman = "human females"
 * girl = "human females"
 * man = "human male"
 * boy = "human male"

Non-binary people are not recognized.

Intersex people who are "born with a medically verifiable diagnosis of
'disorder/differences in sex development'" should be considered disabled
and provided accommodations under the Americans with Disabilities Act.

The Attorney General has issued an opinion requiring state agencies to
re-issue driver's licenses and birth certificates where they have been
changed because a person is transgender. The re-issued licenses and
certificates would indicate the sex assigned at birth. The Governor
disagrees with this interpretation and has made some indications
(but not official executive orders) that she will direct agencies to
continue to not re-issue documents with sex assigned at birth, but a
state court thus far has agreed with the attorney general, overruling
the Governor (as of July 10, 2023).

Note that these laws while targeting trans people also place gender
non-conforming cis women at risk of invasive questioning and state
action.

## Medical Care

 * Trans medical care is legal for all ages
 * Federal regulations protecting trans people in were blocked in
   Kansas due to the Tennessee v Becerra preliminary injunction on
   July 3, 2024. Thus trans people do not have many of the federal
   protections on the basis of sex when obtaining medical care in this
   state.

## Child Custody / Abuse

 * Transition care is not specifically defined as child abuse
 * There is no sanctuary law preventing cooperation with other
   jurisdictions
 
## Relationship Recognition

 * Same-sex marriage (and thus all trans marriage) is recognized

## Relevant Laws

 * [2023 SB180 - Trans-exclusionary Definition of Sex](http://kslegislature.org/li/b2023_24/measures/documents/sb180_enrolled.pdf)
 * [2023 Attorney General Opinion on SB180](https://ag.ks.gov/docs/default-source/ag-opinions/ago-2023-2-rep-barth---final.pdf?sfvrsn=f3f6bc1a_4)

## General Safety

Some communities may be more welcoming than others. For instance,
Lawrence was indicated as a welcoming city and has passed an ordinance
that [prohibits collecting sex assigned at
birth](https://lawrencekstimes.com/2023/07/18/lawrencecitycomm-approves-ord9999/)
or otherwise cooperating with 2023 SB180.

Bathroom access is a significant issue in Kansas.  Already, in May
2023, the same month the trans-exclusionary definition of sex was
enacted, a cis woman in a public library who was assisting her
non-verbal son use the bathroom was
[kicked out of the women's bathroom](https://www.cjonline.com/story/news/politics/government/2023/05/23/amid-anti-trans-law-kansas-woman-son-asked-to-leave-library-restroom/70245966007/),
which she believes is connected to SB180 (prior to the passage of SB180,
they had used the bathroom for years). The son's presence was also
objected to by another bathroom user in addition to library staff,
showing that this policing bathrooms is on the mind of Kansas citizens.
Note that in addition to these actions, these laws while targeting trans
people also place gender non-conforming cis women at risk of invasive
questioning and state action.

Beyond bathrooms, hostility against rainbow symbols, even rainbow
symbols that have nothing to do with the LGBT community (such as the
neurodiversity pride symbol, which is a rainbow-colored infinity symbol,
but is not about gender or sexuality), which [one county
banned](https://news.yahoo.com/kansas-town-axed-librarians-confusing-162943798.html)
at a library (the Sterling library).  Another library, Andover Library,
[received
threats](https://www.ksn.com/news/local/andover-public-library-goes-dark-on-social-media-after-banned-book-display-leads-to-threats/)
after posting information about a banned books week display on their
social media (the display included _Gender Queer_).

Because of the rhetoric around trans people in the political and media
space, trans people should use caution, particularly in bathrooms,
locker rooms, showers, etc.  Random and targeted attacks may occur, and
trans people who report these attacks can expect to be misgendered by
officials and public institutions.

Should a trans person interact with state government, they should be
expected to be treated in every way based on their sex assigned at
birth. Note that law enforcement generally has access to previous
identification issued in other states, and thus having identification
changed in another state is likely not sufficient to protect a trans
person.

## Resources

 * [Movement Advancement Project Kansas Page (lists cities with gender identity protections](https://www.lgbtmap.org/equality-maps/profile_state/KS)
 * [Kansas Allowed to Ban Birth Certificate Changes by Federal Judge](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/politics/kansas-officials-are-no-longer-required-to-change-transgender-peoples-birth-certificates-judge-says)
