# United States - Louisiana

This page contains regional-specific information that is in addition to
the information at [General United States
Information](notes/usa-general.md).

The NAACP of Louisiana has requested the national organization [issue a
travel advisory](https://www.wbrz.com/news/naacp-seeking-travel-advisory-for-louisiana-citing-concerning-policies/)
for Louisiana, on the basis of anti-Black and anti-LGBT state bills that
could place both Black and LGBT people at risk.

Louisiana has negative laws towards trans people. These laws are, while
horrible for residents of Louisiana, do not generally apply to most trans
people traveling to Louisiana in most situations.

Louisiana does ban trans care for children, although the current law does
not have criminal penalties for parents.  However, it is unknown how this
might have an impact on child custody.

## Non-discrimination Law

 * Louisiana non-discrimination law does not include LGBT people specifically
 * State officials have directed schools to [ignore Title IX
   regulations](https://www.losangelesblade.com/2024/04/25/four-states-to-ignore-new-title-ix-rules-protecting-trans-students/)
   (as of April 25, 2024) regarding non-discrimination against trans people.
 * Some municipalities have local non-discrimination laws that apply to
   gender identity, particularly New Orleans and Shreveport.

## Public Accommodations

 * Trans people are banned from access to bathrooms and sleeping
   facilities in some locations (prisons, K12 schools, and domestic
   violence shelters).
 * General public accommodation access is not specifically protected by law
   for trans people in Louisiana.

## Drag / Performance / Cross-dressing Laws

 * Louisiana does not have a drag/cross-dressing law.

## Air Travel

See the [USA TSA](notes/tsa.md) document.

## Jails / Prisons

 * Trans women are required to be housed with men.
 * Trans men are required to be housed with men.
 * Nonbinary people are required to be housed according to sex
   assigned at birth
 * At least one visitor (not an inmate) was told to [strip and expose her
   genitalia](https://www.nola.com/lawsuit-angola-prison-guards-ordered-transgender-visitor-to-strip/article_6cf44702-2b01-537b-94f4-c3ca7894e332.html)
   while going through security to visit a prisoner at Angola Prison because
   her anatomy did not match her gender expression.

## Legal Definition of Sex

Non-binary people are not recognized.

Louisiana has established a legal definition of male and female in line
with sex assigned at birth.

## Medical Care

 * Trans medical care is legal for adults
 * Medical transition (puberty blockers, hormones, surgeries) for people
   under 18 is illegal.
 * The trans youth medical ban is [being challenged in
   court](https://lambdalegal.org/legal_document/soe_la_20240108_petition-for-declaratory-permanent-injunctive-relief/).
 * Federal regulations protecting trans people in were blocked in
   Louisiana due to the Tennessee v Becerra preliminary injunction on
   July 3, 2024. Thus trans people do not have many of the federal
   protections on the basis of sex when obtaining medical care in this
   state.

## Child Custody / Abuse

 * Trans medical care is illegal for youth in Louisiana, although penalties
   will apply to doctors providing the care and not to parents.
 * It is unknown if transition might be used by the state to justify
   custody removal.
 * There is no sanctuary law preventing cooperation with other
   jurisdictions

## Relationship Recognition

 * Same-sex marriage (and thus all trans marriage) is recognized

## Relevant Laws

 * [2023 SB7 - Library Children's Book Ban](https://legiscan.com/LA/text/SB7/2023)
 * [2023 HB648 - Trans Youth Medical Care Ban](https://legiscan.com/LA/text/HB648/2023)
 * [2024 HB122 - Don't Say Gay Law (not yet signed by governor as of May 24, 2024)](https://legis.la.gov/legis/BillInfo.aspx?i=245686)
 * [2024 HB608 - Bathroom Ban](https://www.legis.la.gov/legis/ViewDocument.aspx?d=1364962)

## General Safety

New Orleans has a visible LGBT population, but this is not the case in
other parts of Louisiana, including some nearby cities of New Orleans.

"Sexually explicit" materials in libraries (electronically or in print)
are restricted. This will likely be used to target LGBT material. Beyond
that, nearly all discussion of sexual orientation and gender identity
will be restricted in K12 schools, including in extra curricular events
if 2024 HB122 is signed by the governor.

Some government officials are explicitly anti-trans. For instance, on 22
April 2024, the
Superintendent of Education directed local school districts to [ignore
federal civil rights
guidance](https://thehill.com/homenews/lgbtq/4613178-louisiana-education-chief-tells-schools-to-ignore-new-title-ix-rules-for-transgender-students/)
on Title IX, in favor of anti-trans policies.

Because of the rhetoric around trans people in the political and media
space, trans people should use caution, particularly in bathrooms,
locker rooms, showers, etc.  Random and targeted attacks may occur, and
trans people who report these attacks can expect to be misgendered by
officials and public institutions.

## Resources

