# United States - Montana

Montana has several negative laws towards trans people.

Montana does not ban trans care for children (due to a court judgment
that invalidated a healthcare ban).

## Non-discrimination Law

 * Montana non-discrimination law does not include LGBT people
 * Some municipalities have local non-discrimination laws that apply to
   gender identity, including Bozeman, Butte, Helena, Missoula, and Whitefish.

## Public Accommodations

 * Montana has wide-reaching religious freedom laws that allow denial of
   many services on the basis of gender identity.
 * School students will not be able to be disciplined for using
   pronouns associated a trans person's sex assigned at birth or their
   legal name..

## Drag / Performance / Cross-dressing Laws

 * Drag storytime or other "learning activities" with children present
   in schools, libraries is banned, but this law is currently
   unenforceable due to a [temporary restraining
   order](https://storage.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.mtd.73809/gov.uscourts.mtd.73809.13.0.pdf)
 * At least one library (Butte) has [canceled a talk on two-spirit
   identity](https://mtstandard.com/news/local/butte-silver-bow-county-halts-transgender-woman-s-library-lecture/article_9771f330-00d3-11ee-9c16-6fa909f26697.html)
   to be given by a trans woman, citing the anti-drag law as the reason.
 * The Montana drag ban is being
   [challenged in court](https://billingsgazette.com/montana-drag-reading-ban-lawsuit/article_bbbc9f32-f278-5957-9f09-504fdbe02450.html).

## Air Travel

See the [USA TSA](notes/tsa.md) document.

## Jails / Prisons

 * Trans women would typically be housed with men
 * Trans men would typically be housed with women
 * Nonbinary people would typically be housed according to sex
   assigned at birth

## Legal Definition of Sex

Montana passed a law that defined sex largely in line with sex assigned
at birth, which impacted nearly all Montana law (for example, Montana's
on-the-books-but-not-enforceable-due-to-SCOTUS anti-gay marriage law was
amended, as well as nearly every other law in Montana that references
sex).  However, the law was ruled invalid [due to an ambiguous
title](https://dailymontanan.com/2024/06/25/montana-law-defining-sex-as-male-or-female-unconstitutional-judge-says/)
by a state court.  Thus it is not in effect.

Non-binary people are not recognized.

A Montana law generally prevents changing of ID or birth certificate.
They have previously violated court orders on birth certificate changes.
The state is currently (as of December 17, 2024) [being
sued](https://thehill.com/homenews/lgbtq/4603075-montana-sued-over-refusal-to-amend-transgender-peoples-identity-documents/)
for the ban on changing birth certificates and ID.  On December 17,
2024, a state court [issued a preliminary
injunction](https://assets.aclu.org/live/uploads/2024/12/Order-Motion-for-Preliminary-Injunction.pdf)
against the state blocking this law. Thus, IDs and birth certificates
can be changed, at least if Montana follows this court order (they have
refused to follow similar orders in the past).

## Medical Care

 * Trans medical care is legal for all ages.
 * While a law was passed to ban trans healthcare for youth, that law
   is blocked by a preliminary injunction while further court hearings
   are held. This injunction was supported by findings of the [Montana
   Supreme
   Court](https://assets.aclu.org/live/uploads/2024/12/Opinion-Published-6.pdf).
 * Medical providers can deny non-emergency care on the basis of their
   religious beliefs or conscious.
 * A [federal executive
   order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/01/protecting-children-from-chemical-and-surgical-mutilation/)
   and hospitals seeking to limit their liability even before
   implementation of this order may make accessing care difficult or
   impossible for those under 19-years-old. (updated 13 February 2025).
   However, the government is prevented from implementing this order
   (thus hospitals are not bound by it) because of a [temporary
   restraining
   order](https://assets.aclu.org/live/uploads/2025/02/093114651219.pdf)
   against the government (13 February 2025).

## Child Custody / Abuse

 * Transition care is not specifically defined as child abuse.
 * There is no sanctuary law preventing cooperation with other
   jurisdictions
 
## Relationship Recognition

 * Same-sex marriage (and thus all trans marriage) is recognized

## Relevant Laws

 * [2023 HB303 - Health Care Conscious Refusal Law](https://legiscan.com/MT/text/HB303/id/2785644)
 * [2023 SB99 - Youth Trans Medical Care Ban - DECLARED UNCONSTITUTIONAL](https://legiscan.com/MT/text/SB99/id/2786141)
 * [2023 HB359 - Drag Storytime Ban (temporarily blocked by courts from being enforced)](https://legiscan.com/MT/text/HB359/id/2804104)
 * [2023 SB458 - Trans-exclusionary Definition of Sex (Declared invalid by state court)](https://legiscan.com/MT/text/SB458/id/2796910)
 * [2023 SB518 - Mandatory Outing by Schools of Trans Youth](https://legiscan.com/MT/text/SB518/id/2800789)

## General Safety

White supremacists and anti-trans hate groups have been known to show up
at LGBT events in Montana. For instance, on May 20, 2023, a white
supremacist transphobic hate group [attacked attendees](https://www.losangelesblade.com/2023/05/21/bozeman-pride-marred-by-white-supremacy-anti-lgbtq-groups/)
at Bozeman Pride.

Because of the rhetoric around trans people in the political and media
space, trans people should use caution, particularly in bathrooms,
locker rooms, showers, etc.  Random and targeted attacks may occur, and
trans people who report these attacks can expect to be misgendered by
officials and public institutions.

## Resources

 * [van Garderen v. State of Montana - Youth Trans Care Ban Challenge](https://lambdalegal.org/case/van-garderen-v-state-of-montana/)
 * [van Garderen v. State of Montana - Supreme Court Upholding
   Preliminary
   Injunction](https://assets.aclu.org/live/uploads/2024/12/Opinion-Published-6.pdf)
 * [Drag Ban - Temporary Restraining Order](https://storage.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.mtd.73809/gov.uscourts.mtd.73809.13.0.pdf)
