# United States - Oklahoma

This page contains regional-specific information that is in addition to
the information at [General United States
Information](notes/usa-general.md).

Oklahoma has negative laws towards trans people. Some of these laws may
place trans visitors at risk.

Oklahoma's executive branch considers sex and gender to be synonyms of
sex assigned at birth. This applies to government facilities and
processes, such as restrooms managed by the state government.

Oklahoma does criminalize trans care for children, but does not penalize
parents (the law applies to medical providers).  However, it is unknown
how this might have an impact on child custody.

Note that some indigenous nations within the boundaries of Oklahoma may
ban same-sex marriage recognition for people receiving services from
these nations (but this does not generally apply to non-native
visitors).

## Non-discrimination Law

 * Oklahoma state executive branch government is required to treat trans
   women as men, trans men as women, and non-binary people on the basis
   of their sex assigned at birth.  Note this also places gender
   non-conforming cis women at risk of invasive questioning and state
   action.
 * Oklahoma non-discrimination law does not include LGBT people.
 * State officials have directed schools to [ignore Title IX
   regulations](https://www.losangelesblade.com/2024/04/25/four-states-to-ignore-new-title-ix-rules-protecting-trans-students/)
   (as of April 25, 2024) regarding non-discrimination against trans people.
 * Norman, OK has a non-discrimination law locally.

## Public Accommodations

 * Trans people are required to use bathrooms/showers associated with their
   sex assigned at birth when using some bathrooms/showers in both
   schools and locations under the authority of the executive branch of
   state government.  Note that this also places gender non-conforming
   cis women at risk of invasive questioning and state action.
 * Public accommodation access is not protected for trans people in
   Oklahoma.
 * Oklahoma has religious freedom laws that allow denial of some services
   on the basis of gender identity.

## Drag / Performance / Cross-dressing Laws

 * Drag performance and cross-dressing is legal in Oklahoma.

## Air Travel

See the [USA TSA](notes/tsa.md) document.

## Jails / Prisons

 * Trans women will be housed with men due to executive order.
 * Trans men will be housed with women due to executive order.
 * Nonbinary people will typically be housed according to sex
   assigned at birth due to executive order.
 * Medical care (HRT) has been discontinued for at least one prisoner
   due to prison staff believing she was "faking" being transgender.
 * Medical care other than HRT is not generally provided (by policy).

## Legal Definition of Sex

Non-binary people are not recognized.

Under executive order, all executive branch government departments must
consider a person's gender and sex to be the same as their sex assigned
at birth. This applies to "single sex facilities" under executive branch
control, such as bathrooms.  Note that this also places gender
non-conforming cis women at risk of invasive questioning and state
action.

Trans people cannot change their identification or birth certificate in
Oklahoma.

Some laws specify male, female, and similar words based on sex assigned
at birth and/or chromosomes.

## Medical Care

 * Trans medical care is legal for adults
 * Trans medical care is illegal for youth in Oklahoma, although parents
   are not penalized by the law (it applies to medical providers).
 * Medical providers can deny some care on the basis of their religious
   beliefs.
 * Federal regulations protecting trans people in were blocked in
   Oklahoma due to the Tennessee v Becerra preliminary injunction on
   July 3, 2024. Thus trans people do not have many of the federal
   protections on the basis of sex when obtaining medical care in this
   state.
 * A [federal executive
   order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/01/protecting-children-from-chemical-and-surgical-mutilation/)
   and hospitals seeking to limit their liability even before
   implementation of this order may make accessing care difficult or
   impossible for those under 19-years-old. (updated 13 February 2025).
   However, the government is prevented from implementing this order
   (thus hospitals are not bound by it) because of a [temporary
   restraining
   order](https://assets.aclu.org/live/uploads/2025/02/093114651219.pdf)
   against the government (13 February 2025).

## Child Custody / Abuse

 * Trans medical care is illegal for youth in Oklahoma, although parents
   are not penalized by the law (it applies to medical providers).
 * It is unknown if transition might be used by the state to justify
   custody removal.
 * There is no sanctuary law preventing cooperation with other
   jurisdictions
 * Child welfare agencies are covered by a law that allows them to
   refuse services for religious reasons.
 
## Relationship Recognition

 * Same-sex marriage (and thus all trans marriage) is recognized,
   outside of some indigenous nations.
 * The Cherokee Nation and Chickasaw Nations recognize same-sex
   marriage.
 * Some indigenous nations (Muscogee/Creek Nation, Choctaw Nation,
   and Seminole Nation) within the boundaries of Oklahoma have banned
   recognition of same-sex marriage, although this only applies to
   people receiving services from these nations (I.E. most visitors
   are not impacted by these bans). It is unknown how the "sex" of
   trans people would be seen under these laws, potentially placing some
   trans/cis marriages at risk (straight or queer) as well as some queer
   marriages.

## Relevant Laws

 * [2023 EO 2023-20 - Executive Order Definition of Sex/Gender](https://www.iwv.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/OK-gov-stitt-executive-order-womens-bill-of-rights.pdf)
 * [2023 SB613 - Trans Youth Healthcare Ban](https://legiscan.com/OK/text/SB613/id/2795559)
 * [2023 SB615 - Trans School Bathroom Ban](https://legiscan.com/OK/text/SB615/id/2586890)
 * [2022 SB1100 - Birth Certificate Change Ban](https://legiscan.com/OK/text/SB1100/id/2573918)
 * [Executive Order 2021-24 Banning Birth Certificate Changes](https://www.sos.ok.gov/documents/executive/2014.pdf)
 * [Oklahoma Prison Manual on Trans Prisoners](https://oklahoma.gov/content/dam/ok/en/doc/documents/policy/section-14/op140147.pdf)

## General Safety

The executive order that defines sex/gender on the basis of sex assigned
at birth. This places trans people at risk when using state facilities
and interacting with state government.

The state has a law that prevents instruction on sexual orientation in
schools (and requires students be taught that avoiding gay sex will
prevent HIV).

Because of the rhetoric around trans people in the political and media
space, trans people should use caution, particularly in bathrooms,
locker rooms, showers, etc.  Random and targeted attacks may occur, and
trans people who report these attacks can expect to be misgendered by
officials and public institutions.

## Resources

 * [Trans Woman Allowed to Sue Oklahoma Prisons](https://apnews.com/article/lawsuits-oklahoma-5f46d0c5c485274b0c0eb248689a9962)
 * [ACLU Page on Lawsuit Against SB613](https://www.acluok.org/en/press-releases/families-doctors-challenge-oklahomas-ban-health-care-trans-youth)
 * [Order Denying Preliminary Injunction against
   SB613](https://lambdalegal.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/Poe-v.-Drummond-dkt-138-opinion-and-order.pdf)

