# United States - Wyoming

This page contains regional-specific information that is in addition to
the information at [General United States
Information](notes/usa-general.md).

Wyoming does have negative laws towards trans people.

Wyoming bans trans youth medical care with the exception of mental
health care. It is unknown how this impacts custody, although it
should be noted that the law applies to medical providers and not
parents.


## Non-discrimination Law

 * Wyoming non-discrimination law does not include trans people.
 * Some municipalities have local non-discrimination laws that apply to
   gender identity.
 * Gillette engaged a special prosecutor to investigate librarians for
   obscenity charges related to LGBT material in the public library.

## Public Accommodations

 * Gillette, WY has banned trans people from using gendered bathrooms
   that do not align with their sex assigned at birth in the county
   recreation center.
 * Trans people are not banned from using appropriate bathrooms and locker
   rooms in the rest of the state.
 * General public accommodation access is not specifically protected by law
   for trans people in Wyoming as a whole (but is in some municipalities).

## Drag / Performance / Cross-dressing Laws

 * Wyoming does not have a drag/cross-dressing law.
 * Gillette, Wyoming's library cancelled a children's event that was to be
   performed by a transgender woman.
 * LGBT events at the University of Wyoming in 2023 attract transphobic
   extremists seeking to stop the events.

## Air Travel

See the [USA TSA](notes/tsa.md) document.

## Jails / Prisons

 * Trans women are typically housed with men, but in some cases can be
   housed with women, at least on paper, at the state level.
 * Trans men are typically housed with women, but in some cases can be
   housed with women, at least on paper, at the state level.
 * Nonbinary people are typically housed according to sex assigned at
   birth.
 * Wyoming in 2009 was arguing in court for the housing of intersex people
   in administrative segregation, however a judge did determine that this
   was a violation of the prisoner's 14th Amendment rights.
 * All state trans prisoners are currently housed according to their sex
   assigned at birth (as of Aug 9, 2023).

## Legal Definition of Sex

Non-binary people are not recognized in Wyoming.

## Medical Care

 * Trans medical care is legal for adults.
 * Puberty blockers, hormone therapy, and surgery is illegal for minors,
   as of July 1, 2024.
 * Wyoming does not have a "sanctuary" law.

## Child Custody / Abuse

 * The state, as of July 1, 2024, will ban block most non-mental-health
   care for trans youth, this does not penalize parents. However it is
   unknown how this will impact custody in the eyes of Wyoming courts.
 * Wyoming does not have a sanctuary law for people obtaining
   transition-related medical care.

## Relationship Recognition

 * Same-sex marriage (and thus all trans marriage) is recognized

## Relevant Laws

 * 2024 HB99 - [Anti-trans minor health care
   ban](https://wyoleg.gov/Legislation/2024/SF0099)

## General Safety

Many areas of the state are extremely right-wing (such as Gillette) and
people in those locations strongly oppose trans people. Many Wyoming
residents tend to side uncritically with more extremist Republican
positions. In particular, some Gillette residents have shown willingness
to aggressively express hatred towards trans people. Jackson and Laramie
tend to be more progressive (by Wyoming standards).

While Laramie is considered progressive by Wyoming standards, it has
also attracted both in-state and out-of-state transphobic extremists
when University of Wyoming student groups show support for transgender
people. Transphobic speakers are invited by at least one student
organization to speak against transgender people on campus.

A Colorado athlete competing in an amateur (recreational) tennis competition
[decided to not
compete](https://cowboystatedaily.com/2023/08/04/citing-safety-concerns-transgender-tennis-player-withdraws-from-wyoming-governors-cup/)
during August, 2023, due to safety concerns. This was fed by her
forcible outing, media storm in Wyoming, and prominent Wyoming
politicians speaking out against her, causing the story to go
world-wide. Trans women in particular should be aware of negative
attention and potential violence should they participate in women's
activities in Wyoming.

Because of the rhetoric around trans people in the political and media
space, trans people should use caution, particularly in bathrooms,
locker rooms, showers, etc.  Random and targeted attacks may occur, and
trans people who report these attacks can expect to be misgendered by
officials and public institutions.

## Resources

 * [Movement Advancement Project Wyoming Page (lists cities with non-discrimination law)](https://www.lgbtmap.org/equality_maps/profile_state/WY)
 * [Wyoming Equality (LGBT advocacy organization)](https://www.wyomingequality.org/)
 * [News Article on Wyoming Prison
   Policy](https://cowboystatedaily.com/2023/08/01/wyoming-dept-of-corrections-updates-policy-on-transgender-inmates/)
