# United States - Air Travel and Screening

Due to a January 20, 2025 [executive
order](https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/2025/01/defending-women-from-gender-ideology-extremism-and-restoring-biological-truth-to-the-federal-government/),
the policies below are likely to change within months of the order.
These changes may include trans people being screened according to sex
assigned at birth, including pat-downs by people who share the trans
person's sex assigned at birth.

The below mostly discusses the policies that exist as of now, prior to
implementation of the order.

When flying out of USA airports (including after connecting from
international flights), security screening is required.  This is done by
the TSA.

TSA recommends that tickets booked for travel out of USA airports be
booked with a gender marker that matches the gender on the person's ID
they are using for travel.  However, it is not technically required, and
not all airlines implement the "X" gender marker yet.

Note if you are traveling internationally, you may be required to travel
with a ticket booked with the same gender as the passport you will be
using.

TSA utilizes body scanning technology for travelers not selected for
pre-check (see below).  When using this technology, at most airports,
the screener will hit a pink or blue button based on the anatomy and/or
gender they think the passenger has/is.  This may or may not match
gender expression.  This adjusts the machine to expect certain anatomy.
If the pink button is pushed, a penis will likely alert the TSA (it
won't say what is wrong, but will place a colored box on a cartoon
figure of a passenger indicating what needs to be patted down by the
TSA).  If they hit a blue button, breasts will likely alert.

Pat downs of these sensitive areas may be aggressive and triggering. You
have the right to ask for a private space and the screener of the
desired gender, although official policies may not always be followed.

Behavior seen as aggressive towards the TSA may result in criminal or
civil action, and you may not be allowed through security.

## Gender Mismatch with ID

In the USA, you should generally not have problems with a gender
expression that does not match your ID.  Note this does not apply at
international destinations.

This may change due to the executive order.

## Pre-Check

If you travel frequently and have the money to enroll, you can enroll in
the "Pre-Check" (or "Global Entry" which includes pre-check) program.
This increases your chance of being selected for pre-check screening. If
your boarding pass indicates "pre-check", you can use dedicated
pre-check lanes at most airports, and typically these will require a
metal detector but not body scanner, making travel possibly less
triggering. 

## Note about International Travel

This only applies to travel from USA-airports.  If you fly
internationally, airports in other countries will have different
procedures. Pre-check is a USA program, and does not apply outside the
USA.

If you are entering the USA, consult the [USA international visitors](notes/usa-immigration.md) page.

## Airport Bathrooms

See [Airport Bathrooms](notes/airport-bathrooms.md) elsewhere in this guide
for additional information.
